Thank you, friends. Thank you. Thank you all. It's a great joy to be here once again, to
really take the time to come to reflect on and absorb the Dharma into our hearts, into
our minds, into our lives. So really, it's quite a celebration, actually. So I really
feel that kind of brightness to actually have that opportunity. And so along with
that great brightness and just the relief of the Dharma, wow, we actually have the
Dharma. Then let's really reactivate that, that freshness, that connection, the deep,
warm-hearted kind of sizzling sensation of kind of gratitude and preciousness and
for ourselves, for our situation, for our friends and family, for the world. And
we'll reactivate that in our hearts and our minds right now. So we do that in
these three ways, which are these pithy essential points for any Vajrayana
Tibetan Buddhist practitioner is renunciation, bodhicitta, and pure
perception. So renunciation, we're going to renounce the causes of suffering. So
that's a great self-love. We're going to really appreciate what we have, all the
goodness and the virtue, the amazing qualities we have, the world has, that
this opportunity affords. So really kind of turn on that gratitude, that joy and
appreciation, and a really kind of tender, kind of loving, kind of really alive way.
So we try to really reactivate that fresh joy and appreciation. Then at the
same time, we want all beings, every single being, to be totally supported and
loved and cared for and uplifted and protected and just really nourished in
all the ways, to be free of all the troubles and the causes of trouble. So
this bodhicitta, this really active heart-mind of enlightenment, this is like
really not just kind of lip service, we're really trying to turn that on, to
really think for all beings who are coming here to practice, to kind of
contemplate the Dharma, so that this time together, this moment, can be one of the
principal conditions that all beings will finally have ongoing happiness and
freedom forever, every single being. So we kind of really kind of try to brighten
that bodhicitta, and then at the same time, they'd kind of see this more the
kind of essential goodness or the purity, that kind of amazing kind of dazzling
display of experience, of the world, of ourselves, this pure perception and these
three vajras, pure body, pure speech, pure mind, pure form, pure sound, pure space,
and we really try to connect with our goodness nature first, and then allow its
expressive, energetic quality, its cognizance, its knowing quality, its
display capacity, to shine out from that goodness and experience everything as
being essentially all good. This is kind of more the pure perception, so we're
really kind of brighten all three of those. Renunciation, bodhicitta,
pure perception.
Wonderful. So it's an amazing thing we have this time together, this experience.
The topic today specifically is kind of put the title as being establishing
protection boundaries. Establishing protection boundaries. That's kind of the
little zone of reality we're gonna circle around here for just a short
period of time. Establishing protection boundaries. I looked up in our daily
prayer sadhana, the PVC daily prayer sadhana, how many times does the word
protect arise in that sadhana? 51 times. It's like a hundred page book. This is
such an important topic in Buddhism. Protection. And then I'm gonna start a
little more generally and then go more into the Buddhism and then specifically
into Tibetan Buddhism. But I wanted to, at first, I really thought I wanted to say
this, like specifically out of the gate around establishing protection
boundaries. Everyone's really needed now. Each of us, we're really needed now. We
have this amazing Dharma. We're a part of a living lineage. We have these living
guides. We have this goods and nature. We have the techniques that we really know
how to be happy. We really know how to undo the causes of suffering. And we know
how to do it quickly. And we know how to have a big view to do it for all beings.
The skillful means the path is really clear. It's a great fortune. It's one of
parts of the great fortunes of having the 18 endowments. And we're all needed.
So this time, I just wanted to say that right out of the gate, please hang on.
Please keep activating your bodhicitta. It really all comes down to bodhicitta.
All the levels of the teaching. The great zogchen tantras, a lot of them are called
bodhicitta. Sutra Mahayana is the essence of Sutra Mahayana, the heart of all of it.
Infinite compassion, one of the four boundless qualities. Really, we have all the things
we need. This is like the perfect time for us to step in and really help because the
energy is going to get strong. It's already strong, right? So many experiences, so
much display, so much speed. There's so many things coming out now. One after
another, after another, after another. And we all have different experiences of
this and perceptions of it and interpretations, but I kind of just
wanted to start with a really heartfelt wish. Please, just like Trungpa Rinpoche
said, it is right as he was introducing Shambhala Tirma teaching lineage in the
early 80s. The world needs you. The world needs you. Like sentient beings, they need
us. And of course, we need them too. This is part of our practice. So please, off the
gate, or out of the gate, please. Bodhicitta, please, please. I said it to
myself too. It's not the time to check out. It's not the time to tune out. It's not
the time to just kind of wall off. And so then this is specifically related to this
topic. Establishing protection boundaries. Because we want to serve the teachings.
We want to serve all beings. This is bodhicitta. But we're actually human
beings too. And we have this Buddha nature that's to some degree coming,
turning on, turning off, probably, for sentient beings. Off, on, off, off, off, off,
off, off, off, off, off, off, off, off, off, off, whatever. The de novo one's on, all the
time. Turn the light on, it stays on.
So how do we protect that? That aspiration? The wish? That genuine bodhisattva
wish? May I serve the teachings and beings for as long as it takes till
every single being is free from suffering and the causes of suffering? How
do we care for that wish? How do we follow through on that vow that we took?
The bodhisattva vow? That's really this question. How do we establish protection
boundaries? What do we do to care for that? Okay, so then I thought to
divide this in general, first in general. Every system that's a living system
that's healthy has boundaries. Everything has like a context. The Buddha taught
this so clearly. Everything's dependently arisen and things arise depending on
causes and conditions. And they extend in a network of causes and conditions.
Everything has a frame. Our perceptions have, they only go, extend so far, right?
Our thoughts, they always hover within the realm of our habitual patterns. Our
alaya extends within its own region. Even generally, not talking about Buddhist
anything, every single healthy system needs to have permeable membranes. It
needs to discern what it takes in, what it doesn't take in. What do I eat that
will help me? What do I not eat that will not help me? We need to have that
discernment, that intelligence, both for our mind and then living systems really
need to establish that. These are called protective boundaries. Why? So then we can
really care for what we're holding, what we're containing, what we're honoring,
what we've committed to be a part of, to work with, to learn from. And we can't
just take it all at once. We can't just do every practice at once. We have to
actually set a boundary. I'm gonna do this practice, or I'm gonna care, I'm gonna
be in a relationship with this person, or I'm gonna pursue this job, or I mean just
all these tasks, we choose these kind of limited spheres that we work in a very
specific context that's bounded. And it's not, that's actually just how things
work. Everything has boundaries, and the boundaries always kind of moving, flexing,
and flowing. So there's no option to not have boundaries. There's no option to not,
to just be unbounded. What does that mean? Boundless compassion. It means work within
the boundaries that you're kind of a part of, and they go on infinitely. But
it's infinite boundaries, all these different systems interacting with each
other. It's not just a big mishmash, it's not that the inside of your body, your
heart has no heart, no wall, and your, it's not, there's all these separate
segmented systems that have boundaries, and communication, what goes in, what goes
out, how it absorbs, how fast. Like these are really specific, exact, very precise
permeable membranes. And the Dharma is no different. The Dharma is just heightened,
because we're not just looking at what's really tangible and obvious. We're also,
in addition, looking at what's really subtle. Karma, cause and effect, cause
conditions and results. And a lot of this is so subtle, imperceptible, definitely
disentient mind. So the question is, what boundaries am I choosing to work with?
And so protection, and there's three things I thought with, in terms of
protection, what am I trying to protect? And then protection from what? I'm trying
to protect that from what? And then how? How do I protect it? So Buddhism has so
many different answers to this. The Buddha taught so many different answers
to these three questions. What am I protecting? Fundamentally, we're protecting
our mind. All Buddha's teachings come down to discipline the mind, tame the mind.
What does that mean? It means we have this essential goodness, this true nature,
what's called Buddha nature, or bodhicitta, this natural heart mind of
enlightenment. We have to protect it from shutting down. We have to protect it from
turning off. We have to protect it from duality mind, right? Fixation on me and
my stuff and what I want and my expectations. All these ways of forgetting,
of being distracted from the true nature. So so many of the teachings and
techniques are about how do we protect our mind, the true awareness? How do we
protect wisdom mind from shutting down into duality mind? So mantra, mantra, mind
protection, that's essentially what it is. These skillful means techniques, how to
abide in the nature, that's actually what yoga is in Buddhism, to abide in the
nature. How do I use secondary conditions and supports? Skillful means to about to
recognize the nature and stay in the nature, be natural. So one, what am I
protecting? That's called in Buddhism the original protector, the nature of mind,
the Buddha nature. And Kenpo Sangham Danyarobhiche gave three months of teachings on
Shabkar's flight of the Garuda and he talked a lot about the original
protector. Tibetan Buddhism is sometimes talked about as youthful based body or
bodhicitta or Buddha nature or essential goodness. The different levels of
teachings talk about the kind of point towards this in different ways depending
what framing or what context, what environment, what boundaries are more
digestible than the Buddha would kind of match that system, that game, that mind.
So what am I protecting? Fundamentally I'm protecting the true nature from my
misrecognition, my mistaken perception, my ignorance. Okay so then there's so many
things, what am I protecting? We always say I'm gonna protect the Dharma, protect
the teachings, protect the Dharma. What does it mean protect the Dharma? This is
so beautiful, this really struck me so much. In Venerable Kambaramapche is the
book Light of Peace, how Buddhism shines in this world. And so many times in this
book when the Buddha, the Rinpoche is here, they're talking about the seven
patriarchs, how after Buddha Shakyamuni passed like how his lineage was maintained.
And then they say on page 29, the Buddha was saying to the, as he appointed the
first regent, Kashapa. Buddha Shakyamuni said this, here's on page 29, the Buddha
appointed Kashapa to be his regent saying, "I will give you my whole teaching.
Keep, maintain, preserve, and spread my teaching, and then give it to Ananda." So
that's what the Buddha said. And then Venerable Kambaramapche's give commentary.
The word keep here means to make certain the teachings are not lost.
Maintain means to connect with, practice, and live the teachings. Preserve means to
not corrupt or alter the meaning of the teachings. Spread means to disseminate
the teachings. So again, I will give you my whole teaching. Keep, maintain, preserve,
and spread my teaching, and then give it to Ananda. This is the exact same, this
phrase, keep, maintain, preserve, and spread was the exact statement that each
of the regents, each of the patriarchs said to the next one as they handed the
full lineage teaching and the full responsibility to maintain, keep, preserve,
and spread that lineage teaching. So what are we protecting? And we say, I want to
protect the Dharma, or serve the Dharma. This is what we're doing. I mean, honestly,
that's what we're all kind of learning to, like, how to do that. What's the full
scope of Buddha's teaching? Well, you could say that in a different way. How is
reality, how is the, how are all natural systems, how do all natural systems
function? That's what the Buddha's pointing at. Naturalness in all contexts.
And then, not just to map that, or think about that, or have memorized something,
but totally mingle that with your being, to live it, to absorb it, to become
totally natural, where it's not the nature over there, and I'm over here, the
Dharma's over there, and I'm over here, like I'm watching it somehow. But to
really let it affect me, and shape me, and change me, transform me, have the
Dharma really change me so that I become more natural, so my true nature is
protected from its unnatural habit to shut down, and turn off, and seal itself
in a little cocoon, a protection boundary that doesn't help it. It actually is like
a prison. It's not a permeable membrane, it's a closed prison cell. So to protect
the Dharma, that's another thing to protect. My true nature? Then the Dharma.
Protect sentient beings. To serve sentient beings. That's the wish of the
Bodhisattva. And there's so many ways to unpack this, but one we know. The six
paramitas, the first paramita is generosity. And that paramita of generosity
is subdivided into three. The third generosity is to protect from fear. And
another way you talk about that is extending life. Life is so precious. Why?
Because mind is so precious, and mind needs a body. Without a body, without a
living body, the mind starts wondering. As long as we're a sentient being, we feel
like we need to be embodied. And we are embodied. We're embodied, embedded, extended.
All this, we're really, you have this, we're in the world. It's form and
emptiness. We're through form. What's so the deepest, a big, like the third
generosity is to protect from fear. Extend life. Then what's the point of extending
life? To serve the Dharma. To protect the Dharma. To serve all beings. To protect
all beings. This is easier said than done, because it goes right back to our
question. All beings, we all have different boundaries. Different ways of
understanding things. Different ways of perceiving. So then we have to get really
clear with our wisdom. How do you make sense of things? How do you, what's
happening in your own experience, in your mind, in your heart? Because otherwise
we're taking our boundaries, and we're gobbling up someone else's world. And
we're saying you have to play my game. But someone doesn't want to play my
game. They're already doing their game. They have their world. I have my ego
clinging. They have their ego clinging. So then, skillfully, how do I actually, what
is this? It's all this idea of like, how do you put yourself in someone else's
shoes, right? That's the how to protect. We really need to viscerally try to, that's
the whole path of bodhisattva and bodhicitta. We're trying to viscerally
experience others as ourselves as more dear than ourselves. Like someone else
has something going on with them. And just like, it's so painful. Like we feel
it so sensitively. Because we're so cued in or tuned in or aligned with their
world, with their boundaries. And then this is where it's about the issue of
permeable membrane. We need to know what to take in, what to take out. What to, like,
leave out or how to remove something that becomes not so good in our system, in my
mind. We need to take out the poison, right? These negative emotions. These
cognitive obscurations. Really, we really have to emphasize this wisdom part too.
So not only the compassion, but the wisdom, the discernment. To clearly see
how things are working, what causes and conditions are working. And at the same
time, it's all a dream. This is all an illusion. It's like a memory being
created. It's like a movie. I'm not saying that as if I've done that, but it's so
clear on the absolute bodhicitta level of Buddha's teachings. That's a really
fundamentally important, especially as the room starts spinning more and faster
and faster and more creative ways. Unexpected, surprising ways. This wisdom
of seeing the illusory nature of things. And that also just means of seeing very
refined interdependence. How things are coming together. How things are coming
apart. And to work with that skillfully. As we viscerally experience someone
else's world, as we develop more that capacity, we can't forget that this is
just a dream. Otherwise, we don't have healthy boundaries. We don't have, we're
not protecting our boundaries. We're not establishing good protection boundaries.
We're just taking everything on with no discernment. The wisdom component really
has to be there. That's kind of jumping ahead a little bit. But what else are we
protecting? We're protecting this precious opportunity to actually manifest our
nature more fully, to shine out brighter for beings. Why do we want to have
a long healthy life? So that we can serve the teachings and beings longer. More
effectively. That we have this opportunity to learn how to do it better.
More carefully. More full of care. More sensitively. More
quantumously. More evenly. We need the opportunity to extend longer. If
we're like lost wondering beings, I need more time to stabilize. I definitely do
personally. We're protecting our motivation. This little baby bodhicitta.
We're protecting our future lives. By cultivating a virtuous mind now, we're
protecting a virtuous mind in the future. Because it's cause and effect. Caring
for this now, it naturally is going to extend into the future. Virtue leads to
virtue. Non-virtue leads to non-virtue. So those are kind of things about what
are we protecting when we talk about established protection boundaries in
Buddhism? We're protecting our mind. We're protecting our true nature. We're
protecting our duality mind from not becoming more dualistic, but less
dualistic. We're aiming towards less dualistic so until we can get free and
be non-dual or have wisdom. We're protecting the teachings. We're
protecting the beings. We're protecting our commitment. We're protecting the
opportunity to last longer. We're protecting the opportunity to last
longer for other people. We're protecting the future. These are all things we're
doing in Buddhism. We talk about protect. Then protect from what? What are we
protecting from? And his only is due to Rinpoche. It's beautiful. He calls these
the three obstacles. These are like all the obstacles we face or the
disruptions, the things that will kind of shut our mind down, make it really
difficult for our true nature to shine out, called the three obstacles. In
liberating duality, Rinpoche's book on eight emanations of Gurir Rinpoche, then
his only is due to Rinpoche has a prayer in the back called a prayer to Gurir
Rinpoche that swiftly removes obstacles and fulfills all wishes. And then page
two of this prayer is page 123. His Holiness due to Rinpoche says, "Earthquakes,
fires, hurricanes, droughts, floods, and the like, please remove all the outer
obstacles of natural disasters externally. All kinds of illnesses of heat, cold,
wind, bile, phlegm, and their combinations, please remove all the inner obstacles of
physical imbalances internally. The neurotic five poisons of mind, attachment,
anger, and the demon of hope and fear, please remove all the secret obstacles
of mental imbalances into pervasive space." He's praying to Guru Padmasambhava
to remove these three obstacles, external obstacles, internal obstacles, and secret
obstacles. These are the things we're trying to protect from. What are the
external obstacles? They're like any, all these outer environment situations that
could be weather related, it could be people related, food related, any of these
circumstances which we're in. If they really threaten us, if they cause our
bodhicitta to turn off, if they cause our enthusiasm to dharma, to dim, this is an
external obstacle. Then an internal obstacle is when our body gets sick, when
our winds get all kind of funny, and then all of a sudden we become a
little more erratic, really tired, really depressed, too excited, too scattered, very
restless. These are the inner obstacles, because why? Our true nature is shutting
down. We have to protect it from shutting down. This is an inner obstacle, secret
obstacle, is when then as the kind of all the internal winds are happening, and
maybe external pressure, then all these kind of things is emotional, they call
emotional turbulence, unexpected upheavals. You know you're having a good day, all
of a sudden it's so dark inside, so obscured, so really tense, so reactive,
and there's no real apparent reason. This is called a secret obstacle. As we
practice, the practice gets us into some more and more subtle layers of our mind.
More and more subtle level habits are revealed, and these come out, these habits
start to come out, and they come out as secret obstacles. All of a sudden we
don't want to practice anymore. All of a sudden we don't have devotion. In His
Holiness, Durya Rinpoche's mountain retreat instructions, he really
pinpoints these. These are very specific moments for practitioners. We have to
reaffirm our bodhicitta, our commitment, our dedication to the dharma. We have to
really reestablish protection boundaries here, reconnect to the dharma, our
annunciation, bodhicitta, pure perception. I'm saying this from my own experience.
Not that I can do this well, but these internal obstacles and upheavals, they
come. Everything's great, all things wonderful, all of a sudden everything's
horrible, you know. Or the opposite, too. It's okay, but it's so wonderful, I love it,
dharma's so great, yeah, like pop, right? Bubble enthusiasm, so easy to pop, and it's
usually related to some kind of upheaval inside. It's not, we're not really, it's
not a permeable membrane that's intelligent. It's just something pops
unexpectedly, we kind of ride the wave, but eventually the wave crashes. So this
is a third obstacle. External obstacles, internal obstacles, we get sick, for
example. Secret obstacles with our mind is doing. We have to protect from these.
Then we jump to this next book. I won't go on too much longer. This is also taught
as, what are we protecting from? Four demons. There's two ways of talking about
these four demons, and Ravic is talking about it, and they're cutting through ego
and revealing fearlessness. This book on should. The four demons, there's two ways
of talking about it. There's more the philosophical way, and then there's the
more experiential or practitioner way. These are the four demons we have to
overcome. We have to protect ourselves from. And the first demon, and that's just
to say these quickly, that philosophical way. Demon of the aggregates, forms like
the, are just basically, you could say in one simple way, our body. Form and our
mind's kind of obsession with how it is in this body. These aggregates. So much of
what we do, say this, so much of what we do in our life is to care for this small
little body, and this small little mouth, and this imperceptible mind. I want the
clothes, and the soft things, and the nice smells, and the warm things, and I want
people to say I'm great, and I want to eat the food I like, and then I'm gonna
have some more food, and then I'll get some more food. We're really caring for
these aggregates. So much of the time, this is a demon of aggregates. Yeah, we
have to care for our body, and what we eat, and I, you know, we have to be good. We
have to be a stand-up citizen. But do we have to be the best, most famous, most
big influencer in the world, or something? This is a demon. Demon of the aggregates.
And then they said the demon of death, the time will come where each of us, our minds,
will have to leave this rented, this rented room of this body, and it's that
time is unexpected, and at a certain point, we can't do anything to stop it.
And then we don't have any more time to complete a virtuous activity, or to
recognize the nature of our mind. Then we get to see it's out of our control. This
is a demon of death. We have to prepare for this now, because that time's coming.
We have to protect ourselves by preparing, right? There's nundra. Then the
demon of negative emotions, the third, and then demon of distractions, the fourth.
Negative emotions? Of course, these are the five poisons. We can't let our true
nature be all muted by these five poisons. This is just common Buddhism. Then demon
of distraction, when people start saying, "Oh, you're so good. Oh, talk more. Oh,
this is so wonderful. Oh, your practice is so great. Oh, this and that." And then it's
gonna be very seductive to think I basically overestimate where I actually
am on the path, by being seduced by pride, essentially. We overestimate our, actually,
our bodhicitta. And then it's really, if you put yourself in a practice lineage,
this is, it's a good checks and balances for this, because there's so many
extraordinary masters that are way past you, way past me. To the Buddha,
Guru Rinpoche, the first 10th day, the first control, Mipham Rinpoche, his only
dude, Rinpoche. So many masters, his Karmapas, his holy Dalai Lama. I mean, they're
just extraordinary human beings, Bodhisattvas and Buddhas. And little old me,
I'm like, really nothing. Like the butt of a firefly. Like it's broken. It can't
even shine. It's so nothing compared to them. Not as if I'm bad, but just, they're
so bright. They're so beautiful. This demon of pride or demon of distraction is
really, we really have to protect from that because it'll basically stop all the
growth. Our little baby bodhicitta, this little baby plant trying to grow, we're
gonna keep moving it with this, our pride. I think I'm already fully grown, but I'm
totally not. I think my samadhi is so strong or my dedication is so strong, but
it's like a little candle in the wind. I really have to protect that by looking
out for this demon of distraction. And then the other way of looking at this
demons is intangible demons, tangible demons, exhilaration and pride. Intangible
demons are anything of our sense doors. Like, or sorry, tangible demons, anything
we can sense with our senses. Intangible demons is all these mental objects,
ideas and emotions. Exhilaration. Wow. It's like this, again, this kind of bubble
enthusiasm or this kind of like, really, it's almost a restless, like energetic,
kind of frenetic quality. It's not even, there's not a sense of the illusory
nature. It's just a big puffing up, like kind of explosion. And then demon of
pride. Oh, I'm so good. Me, me, me. Ego-clinging. All these comes down to
Rinpoche say again and again, the main demon is ego-clinging. When we do all
these wrathful practices, for example, we set things like protection boundaries.
What are we really protecting from? The main obstacle is ego-clinging. Me first.
I'm the best. I'm the most special. My practice. Always me. Me first. Of course,
we have to love ourselves. That's what a renunciation is all about. Self-care.
Really, like we're very valuable beings and there so are these infinite other
beings. We can't lose our perspective and can't be so exaggerated and
disproportionate. Have me be so central and have all the infinite other beings be
so secondary. We really have to reverse that. So then this gets into the how and
then I'll stop. How do we protect our mind and our practice and the dharma and
our service to beings and our bodhicitta? How do we protect it from these demons?
From these things that keep stopping us, our ego-clinging and all of its whole
armies. How do we protect from being overcome by these obstacles? Basically,
how do we protect ourselves from becoming a fickle on/off practitioner? How
can we actually become smooth? Even how do we really mingle with the nature? How
can we really be where we are? Be in our body. Be with our minds, with care and
appreciation, curiosity, open-mindedness, with the fluidity. How do we do that?
There's so many ways to do this. So then we get establishing protection
boundaries. I'll quickly go through list. This is a big protector. The Buddha said
you are your own protector. You are your teacher. I showed you the path. You have
to follow. You have to take the path. You are your own protector. The three things
the Buddha taught, if we have these, we will be protected. We will be our own
protector. Mindfulness, alertness, conscientiousness. With these three, the
Buddha said it's like the Buddha is there with you in person. You become your
own protector. Mindfulness. You see what your mind's doing. Is my true nature
shining? Is my duality mind taking over? You see it as it's happening. Well at
first, if it's right, typically it's happening. Sentient mind is being sentient.
Me, not me. Self, other. And I am more important. Sentient mind. So then in that,
mindfulness is, okay, what do I do to undo that? Mindfulness is remembering the
teaching, the technique, and seeing what my mind needs right now to do that. Okay,
that's mindfulness. Alertness is we guard our senses. Okay, so say we become a
little mindful. We're seeing what our mind's doing as it's doing it. We guard
our senses. What is coming in the membrane? The boundary? And what is it
doing to my mind? What is the sound doing? What is the taste doing? What is the sight,
the image doing? What is it? How is it affecting my mind? This is becoming a
discerning membrane. This alertness. And then, okay, that's pretty interior. But
when we're with other beings, that's like, how am I in my daily life? When I walk
down the street, when I say hi to someone, when I go into a room and other
people are there, conscientiousness is like, is my behavior lining up with the
Dharma or not? So the first is really close. What's my mind doing now? Is it
lining up with the teachings? And what's the instruction to help it attune to the
Dharma, to being natural? And then what's coming in to affect it? And then how is
that displayed more outwardly with others? This is mindfulness, alertness,
conscientiousness. With these three, we will be our own protector. And then the
protection boundaries. There's so many techniques in Vajrayana. The protection
boundary, and it all comes down to bodhicitta. First we establish, like all
this, all friends come. We have a ceremony. All good friends come, give a
gift, and invite them to use their good power and qualities to uplift the
bodhicitta. And anyone who doesn't want to be here and do that, oh, that's what
we're doing here. We're celebrating bodhicitta. Let's take this gift and be
satisfied and leave. Then we establish a protection boundary, protection tent. It
says, "This game here is bodhicitta." And we really establish kind of that. But
before that, we have all this emanating and Buddhism emanate and gather. You send
out all these light rays to touch all beings, to have them be fulfilled with
loving-kindness, compassion, and wisdom. And they turn on, their Buddha nature
shines, and that comes back. There's all these relative, skillful means to connect
with all beings, to have their nature reciprocally shine on, have our shine on,
and their nature shines on. And that works with definitely with kind of all
these deities and yidams and things which I won't go into. But kind of that's
definitely part of the protection tent. Then there's so many things. There's
protection, amulets, and protection cords. What's that all related to lineage
blessings? Living noble beings who are like full-on embodiments of bodhicitta.
Then with their blessings, their living connection to the lineage, awakened
thread of enlightened and lineage energy, of wisdom energy. Then with the
power of their meditation, with their aspiration, with these ritual supports
and precious substances, their own meditation kind of mindfulness. Then
their blessed objects with the intention of being a support for our own minds to
relax and release and ease into their own essential goodness. So they have all
these kind of protective supports is on a more literal level. Wearing protective
amulets and protection cords, right? And asking for prayers of protection, asking
for prayers to remove obstacles. These are all helpful secondary supports and we
need them. And we rely on these Dharma protectors. There's Dharma protectors
that are enlightened and Dharma protectors that are not enlightened. We
need their help. They committed to Guru Rambhache, to actually use all their
abilities to keep the teachings in various ways, depending on their
abilities, to keep the teachings pure, right? To protect the teachings, to
protect beings, to protect the teachers, to protect practitioners. And we need
their support. We need to line up with them. We need to ask for their help.
Because sentient beings, there's all kinds, not just the ones human beings that we
see that our sense stories are currently available to. There's microscopic ones,
there's invisible ones, there's the ones far away, the Buddha taught about so many
beings. And these beings, some of them can really have made vows to
Guru Rambhache. And we need to like really humbly request that they honor
those vows, because we really need their support still. These times and this
degenerate time is getting rockier, you know, where we have all these teachings
from Guru Rambhache and the Buddha. And outwardly, I think it's very much
less gonna be, it's more and more gonna be like a charnel ground. Distractions
are so easy now. We don't have to go to some rocky place to have our own kind of
like inner energetic catch to happen. Just go any, it's just really kind of things
are swirling. So we have these teachings and we really need to like really apply
them in little ways, simple ways. We can protect ourselves, protect the dharma,
protect our minds, protect our goodness. And essentially in a more sutra way,
we're just protecting our virtuous mind. We're protecting our kindness, protecting
our common sense, protecting our just kind of our natural human empathetic
capacity, just be a good person. We're protecting that with the Buddha dharma.
And essentially that comes to my mind, knowing itself clearly. It is essentially
good. I am essentially loving, so are you. And we're amazingly wise. And so we're
kind of honoring that recognition and we're asking for help of the lineage of
our teachers and of ourselves. Bring out that quality, have that courage that's
also very gentle and humble. We can do this and really the world and beings, they
really need us. They need our help and then we really can become a protector.
Let's really say that the Buddha is a protector, a friend to all beings. And on
the path taking refuge as a Buddhist student and the Three Jewels are taking
refuge, we're aspiring to become protectors, really reliable protectors
for all beings. And we first show up as protectors in our own life by connecting
to that original protector of our own goodness nature, our own true nature of
mind. So that's it establishing protection boundaries. So much to say.
Thank you. Thank you.